<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II: Matthew Cuthbert Is Surprised</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Matthew Cuthbert Is Surprised</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Matthew Cuthbert and the sorrel mare jogged comfortably over the eight miles to Bright River. It was a pretty road, running along between snug farmsteads, with now and again a bit of balsamy fir wood to drive through or a hollow where wild plums hung out their filmy bloom. The air was sweet with the breath of many apple orchards and the meadows sloped away in the distance to horizon mists of pearl and purple; while</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúThe little birds sang as if it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one day of summer in all the year.‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Matthew enjoyed the drive after his own fashion, except during the moments when he met women and had to nod to them‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor in Prince Edward Island you are supposed to nod to all and sundry you meet on the road whether you know them or not.</p>
			<p>Matthew dreaded all women except Marilla and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝRachel; he had an uncomfortable feeling that the mysterious creatures were secretly laughing at him. He may have been quite right in thinking so, for he was an odd-looking personage, with an ungainly figure and long iron-gray hair that touched his stooping shoulders, and a full, soft brown beard which he had worn ever since he was twenty. In fact, he had looked at twenty very much as he looked at sixty, lacking a little of the grayness.</p>
			<p>When he reached Bright River there was no sign of any train; he thought he was too early, so he tied his horse in the yard of the small Bright River hotel and went over to the station house. The long platform was almost deserted; the only living creature in sight being a girl who was sitting on a pile of shingles at the extreme end. Matthew, barely noting that it <em>was</em> a girl, sidled past her as quickly as possible without looking at her. Had he looked he could hardly have failed to notice the tense rigidity and expectation of her attitude and expression. She was sitting there waiting for something or somebody and, since sitting and waiting was the only thing to do just then, she sat and waited with all her might and main.</p>
			<p>Matthew encountered the stationmaster locking up the ticket office preparatory to going home for supper, and asked him if the five-thirty train would soon be along.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe five-thirty train has been in and gone half an hour ago,‚Äù answered that brisk official. ‚ÄúBut there was a passenger dropped off for you‚ÅÝ‚Äîa little girl. She‚Äôs sitting out there on the shingles. I asked her to go into the ladies‚Äô waiting room, but she informed me gravely that she preferred to stay outside. ‚ÄòThere was more scope for imagination,‚Äô she said. She‚Äôs a case, I should say.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm not expecting a girl,‚Äù said Matthew blankly. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a boy I‚Äôve come for. He should be here. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAlexander Spencer was to bring him over from Nova Scotia for me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The stationmaster whistled.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGuess there‚Äôs some mistake,‚Äù he said. ‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer came off the train with that girl and gave her into my charge. Said you and your sister were adopting her from an orphan asylum and that you would be along for her presently. That‚Äôs all <em>I</em> know about it‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I haven‚Äôt got any more orphans concealed hereabouts.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt understand,‚Äù said Matthew helplessly, wishing that Marilla was at hand to cope with the situation.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, you‚Äôd better question the girl,‚Äù said the stationmaster carelessly. ‚ÄúI dare say she‚Äôll be able to explain‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe‚Äôs got a tongue of her own, that‚Äôs certain. Maybe they were out of boys of the brand you wanted.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He walked jauntily away, being hungry, and the unfortunate Matthew was left to do that which was harder for him than bearding a lion in its den‚ÅÝ‚Äîwalk up to a girl‚ÅÝ‚Äîa strange girl‚ÅÝ‚Äîan orphan girl‚ÅÝ‚Äîand demand of her why she wasn‚Äôt a boy. Matthew groaned in spirit as he turned about and shuffled gently down the platform towards her.</p>
			<p>She had been watching him ever since he had passed her and she had her eyes on him now. Matthew was not looking at her and would not have seen what she was really like if he had been, but an ordinary observer would have seen this:</p>
			<p>A child of about eleven, garbed in a very short, very tight, very ugly dress of yellowish-gray wincey. She wore a faded brown sailor hat and beneath the hat, extending down her back, were two braids of very thick, decidedly red hair. Her face was small, white and thin, also much freckled; her mouth was large and so were her eyes, that looked green in some lights and moods and gray in others.</p>
			<p>So far, the ordinary observer; an extraordinary observer might have seen that the chin was very pointed and pronounced; that the big eyes were full of spirit and vivacity; that the mouth was sweet-lipped and expressive; that the forehead was broad and full; in short, our discerning extraordinary observer might have concluded that no commonplace soul inhabited the body of this stray woman-child of whom shy Matthew Cuthbert was so ludicrously afraid.</p>
			<p>Matthew, however, was spared the ordeal of speaking first, for as soon as she concluded that he was coming to her she stood up, grasping with one thin brown hand the handle of a shabby, old-fashioned carpetbag; the other she held out to him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose you are <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMatthew Cuthbert of Green Gables?‚Äù she said in a peculiarly clear, sweet voice. ‚ÄúI‚Äôm very glad to see you. I was beginning to be afraid you weren‚Äôt coming for me and I was imagining all the things that might have happened to prevent you. I had made up my mind that if you didn‚Äôt come for me tonight I‚Äôd go down the track to that big wild cherry tree at the bend, and climb up into it to stay all night. I wouldn‚Äôt be a bit afraid, and it would be lovely to sleep in a wild cherry tree all white with bloom in the moonshine, don‚Äôt you think? You could imagine you were dwelling in marble halls, couldn‚Äôt you? And I was quite sure you would come for me in the morning, if you didn‚Äôt tonight.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Matthew had taken the scrawny little hand awkwardly in his; then and there he decided what to do. He could not tell this child with the glowing eyes that there had been a mistake; he would take her home and let Marilla do that. She couldn‚Äôt be left at Bright River anyhow, no matter what mistake had been made, so all questions and explanations might as well be deferred until he was safely back at Green Gables.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm sorry I was late,‚Äù he said shyly. ‚ÄúCome along. The horse is over in the yard. Give me your bag.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, I can carry it,‚Äù the child responded cheerfully. ‚ÄúIt isn‚Äôt heavy. I‚Äôve got all my worldly goods in it, but it isn‚Äôt heavy. And if it isn‚Äôt carried in just a certain way the handle pulls out‚ÅÝ‚Äîso I‚Äôd better keep it because I know the exact knack of it. It‚Äôs an extremely old carpetbag. Oh, I‚Äôm very glad you‚Äôve come, even if it would have been nice to sleep in a wild cherry tree. We‚Äôve got to drive a long piece, haven‚Äôt we? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer said it was eight miles. I‚Äôm glad because I love driving. Oh, it seems so wonderful that I‚Äôm going to live with you and belong to you. I‚Äôve never belonged to anybody‚ÅÝ‚Äînot really. But the asylum was the worst. I‚Äôve only been in it four months, but that was enough. I don‚Äôt suppose you ever were an orphan in an asylum, so you can‚Äôt possibly understand what it is like. It‚Äôs worse than anything you could imagine. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer said it was wicked of me to talk like that, but I didn‚Äôt mean to be wicked. It‚Äôs so easy to be wicked without knowing it, isn‚Äôt it? They were good, you know‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe asylum people. But there is so little scope for the imagination in an asylum‚ÅÝ‚Äîonly just in the other orphans. It <em>was</em> pretty interesting to imagine things about them‚ÅÝ‚Äîto imagine that perhaps the girl who sat next to you was really the daughter of a belted earl, who had been stolen away from her parents in her infancy by a cruel nurse who died before she could confess. I used to lie awake at nights and imagine things like that, because I didn‚Äôt have time in the day. I guess that‚Äôs why I‚Äôm so thin‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI <em>am</em> dreadful thin, ain‚Äôt I? There isn‚Äôt a pick on my bones. I do love to imagine I‚Äôm nice and plump, with dimples in my elbows.‚Äù</p>
			<p>With this Matthew‚Äôs companion stopped talking, partly because she was out of breath and partly because they had reached the buggy. Not another word did she say until they had left the village and were driving down a steep little hill, the road part of which had been cut so deeply into the soft soil that the banks, fringed with blooming wild cherry trees and slim white birches, were several feet above their heads.</p>
			<p>The child put out her hand and broke off a branch of wild plum that brushed against the side of the buggy.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIsn‚Äôt that beautiful? What did that tree, leaning out from the bank, all white and lacy, make you think of?‚Äù she asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, I dunno,‚Äù said Matthew.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, a bride, of course‚ÅÝ‚Äîa bride all in white with a lovely misty veil. I‚Äôve never seen one, but I can imagine what she would look like. I don‚Äôt ever expect to be a bride myself. I‚Äôm so homely nobody will ever want to marry me‚ÅÝ‚Äîunless it might be a foreign missionary. I suppose a foreign missionary mightn‚Äôt be very particular. But I do hope that some day I shall have a white dress. That is my highest ideal of earthly bliss. I just love pretty clothes. And I‚Äôve never had a pretty dress in my life that I can remember‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut of course it‚Äôs all the more to look forward to, isn‚Äôt it? And then I can imagine that I‚Äôm dressed gorgeously. This morning when I left the asylum I felt so ashamed because I had to wear this horrid old wincey dress. All the orphans had to wear them, you know. A merchant in Hopeton last winter donated three hundred yards of wincey to the asylum. Some people said it was because he couldn‚Äôt sell it, but I‚Äôd rather believe that it was out of the kindness of his heart, wouldn‚Äôt you? When we got on the train I felt as if everybody must be looking at me and pitying me. But I just went to work and imagined that I had on the most beautiful pale blue silk dress‚ÅÝ‚Äîbecause when you <em>are</em> imagining you might as well imagine something worthwhile‚ÅÝ‚Äîand a big hat all flowers and nodding plumes, and a gold watch, and kid gloves and boots. I felt cheered up right away and I enjoyed my trip to the Island with all my might. I wasn‚Äôt a bit sick coming over in the boat. Neither was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer, although she generally is. She said she hadn‚Äôt time to get sick, watching to see that I didn‚Äôt fall overboard. She said she never saw the beat of me for prowling about. But if it kept her from being seasick it‚Äôs a mercy I did prowl, isn‚Äôt it? And I wanted to see everything that was to be seen on that boat, because I didn‚Äôt know whether I‚Äôd ever have another opportunity. Oh, there are a lot more cherry trees all in bloom! This Island is the bloomiest place. I just love it already, and I‚Äôm so glad I‚Äôm going to live here. I‚Äôve always heard that Prince Edward Island was the prettiest place in the world, and I used to imagine I was living here, but I never really expected I would. It‚Äôs delightful when your imaginations come true, isn‚Äôt it? But those red roads are so funny. When we got into the train at Charlottetown and the red roads began to flash past I asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer what made them red and she said she didn‚Äôt know and for pity‚Äôs sake not to ask her any more questions. She said I must have asked her a thousand already. I suppose I had, too, but how are you going to find out about things if you don‚Äôt ask questions? And what <em>does</em> make the roads red?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, I dunno,‚Äù said Matthew.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, that is one of the things to find out sometime. Isn‚Äôt it splendid to think of all the things there are to find out about? It just makes me feel glad to be alive‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs such an interesting world. It wouldn‚Äôt be half so interesting if we knew all about everything, would it? There‚Äôd be no scope for imagination then, would there? But am I talking too much? People are always telling me I do. Would you rather I didn‚Äôt talk? If you say so I‚Äôll stop. I <em>can</em> stop when I make up my mind to it, although it‚Äôs difficult.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Matthew, much to his own surprise, was enjoying himself. Like most quiet folks he liked talkative people when they were willing to do the talking themselves and did not expect him to keep up his end of it. But he had never expected to enjoy the society of a little girl. Women were bad enough in all conscience, but little girls were worse. He detested the way they had of sidling past him timidly, with sidewise glances, as if they expected him to gobble them up at a mouthful if they ventured to say a word. This was the Avonlea type of well-bred little girl. But this freckled witch was very different, and although he found it rather difficult for his slower intelligence to keep up with her brisk mental processes he thought that he ‚Äúkind of liked her chatter.‚Äù So he said as shyly as usual:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, you can talk as much as you like. I don‚Äôt mind.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, I‚Äôm so glad. I know you and I are going to get along together fine. It‚Äôs such a relief to talk when one wants to and not be told that children should be seen and not heard. I‚Äôve had that said to me a million times if I have once. And people laugh at me because I use big words. But if you have big ideas you have to use big words to express them, haven‚Äôt you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, that seems reasonable,‚Äù said Matthew.</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer said that my tongue must be hung in the middle. But it isn‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs firmly fastened at one end. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer said your place was named Green Gables. I asked her all about it. And she said there were trees all around it. I was gladder than ever. I just love trees. And there weren‚Äôt any at all about the asylum, only a few poor weeny-teeny things out in front with little whitewashed cagey things about them. They just looked like orphans themselves, those trees did. It used to make me want to cry to look at them. I used to say to them, ‚ÄòOh, you <em>poor</em> little things! If you were out in a great big woods with other trees all around you and little mosses and Junebells growing over your roots and a brook not far away and birds singing in your branches, you could grow, couldn‚Äôt you? But you can‚Äôt where you are. I know just exactly how you feel, little trees.‚Äô I felt sorry to leave them behind this morning. You do get so attached to things like that, don‚Äôt you? Is there a brook anywhere near Green Gables? I forgot to ask <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, yes, there‚Äôs one right below the house.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFancy! It‚Äôs always been one of my dreams to live near a brook. I never expected I would, though. Dreams don‚Äôt often come true, do they? Wouldn‚Äôt it be nice if they did? But just now I feel pretty nearly perfectly happy. I can‚Äôt feel exactly perfectly happy because‚ÅÝ‚Äîwell, what colour would you call this?‚Äù</p>
			<p>She twitched one of her long glossy braids over her thin shoulder and held it up before Matthew‚Äôs eyes. Matthew was not used to deciding on the tints of ladies‚Äô tresses, but in this case there couldn‚Äôt be much doubt.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs red, ain‚Äôt it?‚Äù he said.</p>
			<p>The girl let the braid drop back with a sigh that seemed to come from her very toes and to exhale forth all the sorrows of the ages.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, it‚Äôs red,‚Äù she said resignedly. ‚ÄúNow you see why I can‚Äôt be perfectly happy. Nobody could who had red hair. I don‚Äôt mind the other things so much‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe freckles and the green eyes and my skinniness. I can imagine them away. I can imagine that I have a beautiful rose-leaf complexion and lovely starry violet eyes. But I <em>cannot</em> imagine that red hair away. I do my best. I think to myself, ‚ÄòNow my hair is a glorious black, black as the raven‚Äôs wing.‚Äô But all the time I <em>know</em> it is just plain red, and it breaks my heart. It will be my lifelong sorrow. I read of a girl once in a novel who had a lifelong sorrow, but it wasn‚Äôt red hair. Her hair was pure gold rippling back from her alabaster brow. What is an alabaster brow? I never could find out. Can you tell me?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, I‚Äôm afraid I can‚Äôt,‚Äù said Matthew, who was getting a little dizzy. He felt as he had once felt in his rash youth when another boy had enticed him on the merry-go-round at a picnic.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, whatever it was it must have been something nice because she was divinely beautiful. Have you ever imagined what it must feel like to be divinely beautiful?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, no, I haven‚Äôt,‚Äù confessed Matthew ingenuously.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have, often. Which would you rather be if you had the choice‚ÅÝ‚Äîdivinely beautiful or dazzlingly clever or angelically good?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, I‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI don‚Äôt know exactly.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNeither do I. I can never decide. But it doesn‚Äôt make much real difference for it isn‚Äôt likely I‚Äôll ever be either. It‚Äôs certain I‚Äôll never be angelically good. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer says‚ÅÝ‚Äîoh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCuthbert! Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCuthbert!! Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCuthbert!!!‚Äù</p>
			<p>That was not what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer had said; neither had the child tumbled out of the buggy nor had Matthew done anything astonishing. They had simply rounded a curve in the road and found themselves in the ‚ÄúAvenue.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The ‚ÄúAvenue,‚Äù so called by the Newbridge people, was a stretch of road four or five hundred yards long, completely arched over with huge, wide-spreading apple trees, planted years ago by an eccentric old farmer. Overhead was one long canopy of snowy fragrant bloom. Below the boughs the air was full of a purple twilight and far ahead a glimpse of painted sunset sky shone like a great rose window at the end of a cathedral aisle.</p>
			<p>Its beauty seemed to strike the child dumb. She leaned back in the buggy, her thin hands clasped before her, her face lifted rapturously to the white splendour above. Even when they had passed out and were driving down the long slope to Newbridge she never moved or spoke. Still with rapt face she gazed afar into the sunset west, with eyes that saw visions trooping splendidly across that glowing background. Through Newbridge, a bustling little village where dogs barked at them and small boys hooted and curious faces peered from the windows, they drove, still in silence. When three more miles had dropped away behind them the child had not spoken. She could keep silence, it was evident, as energetically as she could talk.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI guess you‚Äôre feeling pretty tired and hungry,‚Äù Matthew ventured at last, accounting for her long visitation of dumbness with the only reason he could think of. ‚ÄúBut we haven‚Äôt very far to go now‚ÅÝ‚Äîonly another mile.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She came out of her reverie with a deep sigh and looked at him with the dreamy gaze of a soul that had been wondering afar, star-led.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCuthbert,‚Äù she whispered, ‚Äúthat place we came through‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat white place‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat was it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, you must mean the Avenue,‚Äù said Matthew after a few moments‚Äô profound reflection. ‚ÄúIt is a kind of pretty place.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPretty? Oh, <em>pretty</em> doesn‚Äôt seem the right word to use. Nor beautiful, either. They don‚Äôt go far enough. Oh, it was wonderful‚ÅÝ‚Äîwonderful. It‚Äôs the first thing I ever saw that couldn‚Äôt be improved upon by imagination. It just satisfied me here‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe put one hand on her breast‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúit made a queer funny ache and yet it was a pleasant ache. Did you ever have an ache like that, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCuthbert?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, I just can‚Äôt recollect that I ever had.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have it lots of times‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhenever I see anything royally beautiful. But they shouldn‚Äôt call that lovely place the Avenue. There is no meaning in a name like that. They should call it‚ÅÝ‚Äîlet me see‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe White Way of Delight. Isn‚Äôt that a nice imaginative name? When I don‚Äôt like the name of a place or a person I always imagine a new one and always think of them so. There was a girl at the asylum whose name was Hepzibah Jenkins, but I always imagined her as Rosalia DeVere. Other people may call that place the Avenue, but I shall always call it the White Way of Delight. Have we really only another mile to go before we get home? I‚Äôm glad and I‚Äôm sorry. I‚Äôm sorry because this drive has been so pleasant and I‚Äôm always sorry when pleasant things end. Something still pleasanter may come after, but you can never be sure. And it‚Äôs so often the case that it isn‚Äôt pleasanter. That has been my experience anyhow. But I‚Äôm glad to think of getting home. You see, I‚Äôve never had a real home since I can remember. It gives me that pleasant ache again just to think of coming to a really truly home. Oh, isn‚Äôt that pretty!‚Äù</p>
			<p>They had driven over the crest of a hill. Below them was a pond, looking almost like a river so long and winding was it. A bridge spanned it midway and from there to its lower end, where an amber-hued belt of sand-hills shut it in from the dark blue gulf beyond, the water was a glory of many shifting hues‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe most spiritual shadings of crocus and rose and ethereal green, with other elusive tintings for which no name has ever been found. Above the bridge the pond ran up into fringing groves of fir and maple and lay all darkly translucent in their wavering shadows. Here and there a wild plum leaned out from the bank like a white-clad girl tiptoeing to her own reflection. From the marsh at the head of the pond came the clear, mournfully-sweet chorus of the frogs. There was a little gray house peering around a white apple orchard on a slope beyond and, although it was not yet quite dark, a light was shining from one of its windows.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs Barry‚Äôs pond,‚Äù said Matthew.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, I don‚Äôt like that name, either. I shall call it‚ÅÝ‚Äîlet me see‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe Lake of Shining Waters. Yes, that is the right name for it. I know because of the thrill. When I hit on a name that suits exactly it gives me a thrill. Do things ever give you a thrill?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Matthew ruminated.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, yes. It always kind of gives me a thrill to see them ugly white grubs that spade up in the cucumber beds. I hate the look of them.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, I don‚Äôt think that can be exactly the same kind of a thrill. Do you think it can? There doesn‚Äôt seem to be much connection between grubs and lakes of shining waters, does there? But why do other people call it Barry‚Äôs pond?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI reckon because <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBarry lives up there in that house. Orchard Slope‚Äôs the name of his place. If it wasn‚Äôt for that big bush behind it you could see Green Gables from here. But we have to go over the bridge and round by the road, so it‚Äôs near half a mile further.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHas <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBarry any little girls? Well, not so very little either‚ÅÝ‚Äîabout my size.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe‚Äôs got one about eleven. Her name is Diana.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh!‚Äù with a long indrawing of breath. ‚ÄúWhat a perfectly lovely name!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, I dunno. There‚Äôs something dreadful heathenish about it, seems to me. I‚Äôd ruther Jane or Mary or some sensible name like that. But when Diana was born there was a schoolmaster boarding there and they gave him the naming of her and he called her Diana.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI wish there had been a schoolmaster like that around when <em>I</em> was born, then. Oh, here we are at the bridge. I‚Äôm going to shut my eyes tight. I‚Äôm always afraid going over bridges. I can‚Äôt help imagining that perhaps, just as we get to the middle, they‚Äôll crumple up like a jackknife and nip us. So I shut my eyes. But I always have to open them for all when I think we‚Äôre getting near the middle. Because, you see, if the bridge <em>did</em> crumple up I‚Äôd want to <em>see</em> it crumple. What a jolly rumble it makes! I always like the rumble part of it. Isn‚Äôt it splendid there are so many things to like in this world? There, we‚Äôre over. Now I‚Äôll look back. Good night, dear Lake of Shining Waters. I always say good night to the things I love, just as I would to people. I think they like it. That water looks as if it was smiling at me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>When they had driven up the further hill and around a corner Matthew said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôre pretty near home now. That‚Äôs Green Gables over‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, don‚Äôt tell me,‚Äù she interrupted breathlessly, catching at his partially raised arm and shutting her eyes that she might not see his gesture. ‚ÄúLet me guess. I‚Äôm sure I‚Äôll guess right.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She opened her eyes and looked about her. They were on the crest of a hill. The sun had set some time since, but the landscape was still clear in the mellow afterlight. To the west a dark church spire rose up against a marigold sky. Below was a little valley and beyond a long, gently-rising slope with snug farmsteads scattered along it. From one to another the child‚Äôs eyes darted, eager and wistful. At last they lingered on one away to the left, far back from the road, dimly white with blossoming trees in the twilight of the surrounding woods. Over it, in the stainless southwest sky, a great crystal-white star was shining like a lamp of guidance and promise.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs it, isn‚Äôt it?‚Äù she said, pointing.</p>
			<p>Matthew slapped the reins on the sorrel‚Äôs back delightedly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell now, you‚Äôve guessed it! But I reckon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer described it so‚Äôs you could tell.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, she didn‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Äîreally she didn‚Äôt. All she said might just as well have been about most of those other places. I hadn‚Äôt any real idea what it looked like. But just as soon as I saw it I felt it was home. Oh, it seems as if I must be in a dream. Do you know, my arm must be black and blue from the elbow up, for I‚Äôve pinched myself so many times today. Every little while a horrible sickening feeling would come over me and I‚Äôd be so afraid it was all a dream. Then I‚Äôd pinch myself to see if it was real‚ÅÝ‚Äîuntil suddenly I remembered that even supposing it was only a dream I‚Äôd better go on dreaming as long as I could; so I stopped pinching. But it <em>is</em> real and we‚Äôre nearly home.‚Äù</p>
			<p>With a sigh of rapture she relapsed into silence. Matthew stirred uneasily. He felt glad that it would be Marilla and not he who would have to tell this waif of the world that the home she longed for was not to be hers after all. They drove over Lynde‚Äôs Hollow, where it was already quite dark, but not so dark that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝRachel could not see them from her window vantage, and up the hill and into the long lane of Green Gables. By the time they arrived at the house Matthew was shrinking from the approaching revelation with an energy he did not understand. It was not of Marilla or himself he was thinking or of the trouble this mistake was probably going to make for them, but of the child‚Äôs disappointment. When he thought of that rapt light being quenched in her eyes he had an uncomfortable feeling that he was going to assist at murdering something‚ÅÝ‚Äîmuch the same feeling that came over him when he had to kill a lamb or calf or any other innocent little creature.</p>
			<p>The yard was quite dark as they turned into it and the poplar leaves were rustling silkily all round it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúListen to the trees talking in their sleep,‚Äù she whispered, as he lifted her to the ground. ‚ÄúWhat nice dreams they must have!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Then, holding tightly to the carpetbag which contained ‚Äúall her worldly goods,‚Äù she followed him into the house.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
